Do you think you're spreading yourself too thin?
Not really, because I work real fast.
And a lot of the thing is that the project of these nine books, The Wizard of Oz, was done over a year ago.
We published it October 15, 85.
So all that happens is you, and the two, there are two of the three Hardport Brace books that were done two years ago that they're just now re-eating.
So a lot of the work has been done over the past three years.
But I don't mean so much in terms of the work, but I mean in terms of exposure.
Do you think you could perhaps be putting too much stuff out there?
There's a great deal of concern about that.
This year is unusual.
It's extraordinary.
This is an unusual year.
I don't think it'll ever happen again.
Yeah, I'm concerned about that.
It's just, what do you do if you have unlimited energy and have all these projects that you're doing and people want to buy them?
I mean, about people want to buy them.
I mean, Harcourt Brace wants to buy the property.
It's very interesting, too, I think, that you're very successful as a small press owner, illustrator, designer.
You may seem to be more successful than is the truth.
However, you're also doing...
You're also doing things for a more general audience, which can afford, with these beautiful editions, to buy them.
Is this something philosophical, or is it commercial?
It's accidental.
It's not anything that's being done out of any intention.
We did those five big books, the two Alice books, and the Oz.
We did those five behemoths.
In as many years as one big major book a year.
Well, we learned a lot about doing that.
One is that there is a finite market and that you can't sell that many books out of one press at that kind of price because it's just the marketplace.
It won't absorb it.
So we have subsequently an enormous number of books in inventory that just don't sell.
Are you talking pennyroyal books now?
Pennyroyal books, yeah.
Yeah, the first limited edition.
We still have those in inventory.
Every one of them except Alice.
I thought Moby Dick went out.
Well, Moby Dick's not a ten-year-old book.
Oh, okay.
Right, right, right.
I'm sorry.
Moby Dick was out of print before it was printed.
So was Alice for the most part.
Why do you suppose that was?
Why Moby Dick?
Why the appeal so much of that one?
If we had done Huckleberry Finn first... I was going to say Huckleberry Finn would have been my... If we had done Huck Finn instead of Alice in the beginning and done it, it would have been the same thing.
If we had taken one of the books, one of the big ones, and then waited a year, published a small one, and then the next year published another big one, then I think we could have probably been able to sell all of those.
And we will sell them eventually, but right now we're just carrying a huge end.
Well, I mean, the price on them is rather end on this.
We're talking $1,000?
Exactly, $1,500.
Which represents, you know, the math of the thing is exactly the way it is in the publishing industry.
Our unit cost on a book like this is about $300.
You know, we put about $200 in terms of, and that's not paying me anything.
We're putting $200 worth of paper and labor into it, the materials all together, and then we spend $100 to $150 in there for the binding.
And so you end up with the usual figure, 25% of your policy.
I mean, when they're sold, they're sold.
And that's when they'd be... I'm just going to check on the sugar.
Okay, back on.
I read someplace where, for most of these works, you had not read the books prior to illustrating them.
It was a first exposure for you.
Is this just accidental?
How can one do these extraordinary illustrations without knowing the works previously, or is it a question of discovery?
I'm trying to get into an area here.
It all goes back to education.
I spent six years in the military school from 1952 to 1958.
I never read a book, if I could help it.
I read classic comic books instead of reading the books themselves.
I was not a good student.
I had no intellectual curiosity whatsoever until I was 25.
I went through college, went four years of college, never read a book, set the Bible in the shape of content.
I mean, I'm not kidding you.
This is the honest to God truth.
I mean, all I did was play ball and make pictures.
That's all I did.
And I didn't play ball very well.
What kind of ball?
Football.
Is there another kind?
Here we have baseball.
I haven't watched a football game in 20 years.
I don't even like this sport.
I never did while I was playing it.
I never played it very well.
And then I wrestled, and I never wrestled very well.
I never won a match.
I lost every match I ever saw.
And I shot through the javelin and the biscuits.
But, you know, mostly what I did was play and draw pictures of naked women.
That's what I did.
And it never read.
So now when I come to a project, it's always coming to a fresh.
And what was at that time, back in the fifties, an aggravation to my instructors is today
to me as a mature artist in books, or a maturing artist, is a great benefit.
You're still a maturing artist.
Oh, I think so.
I've got to hope so.
But it's a great benefit because when I come to the book, I come to it with any preconceived notions.
I come to it without any prejudices.
The only book that I've done, that I read while I was in school, was Frankenstein.
I did read Frankenstein when I was a senior in college.
I think that's the only one of the lot that I hadn't read, isn't that right?
I've never read any of them.
I mean Dante, everyone.
I read that.
Dante is like the Bible almost for an English major, you know.
And for me, it was like, you know, I've heard of that, you know, but that is it.
Well, how does now Coming to the Inferno, which is, you know, the central book of the Divine Comedy,
You read it, you read Alan's translations, and does Alan say that he wants certain things that he wants you to illustrate?
Yeah, he and I got together on many occasions and talked about it.
And he instructed me, God doing that project was like taking a graduate award.
Oh, it really was.
It was amazing.
And he would say and explain to me how this works, and how that works, and the things that I wasn't seeing.
And since that experience, I have seen
more in literature than I would have seen had it not been for my experience with Allen on the Divine Comedy and on the Aeneid.
Which came from, I know they published the Aeneid after.
The Aeneid actually was called his first, because that was what he won the National Book of.
Right, but I mean, the illustrated edition came after.
Came after.
Somewhere in between, actually, between Inferno and Purgatory.
I think it was between Purgatory and Paradiso that it came after.
It was the millennial edition, which, you know, the 2000 anniversary, which is really kind of cute.
Well, even to make it funnier, nobody realized that until the book was on press, and that's why there's no mention of it on the interior of the book, but on the jacket, because they caught it in time to put it on the jacket, the millennial edition.
You mentioned in one of the interviews that you learned from Baskin drawing, and that he instructed you to go out and do a tree about six or seven times.
When are you happy with the drawing now?
Clearly you've reached a level of expertise.
Generally I'm happy with the drawing if it's finished within an hour, an hour and a half.
That's what it takes to do one?
Well, but that might mean that it'll take four or five days of doing an awful lot of drawings of the same one that go into the garbage to come up with the one.
So you don't keep your variant stuff, you check it.
Some I do.
Some I keep, but most of it goes in the fireplace around the garbage.
Which is smart.
Sure is.
I don't want anybody to see.
You don't have people getting them either.
Putting a price on them.
I'm curious now to see those sorts of things.
There was an exhibit in Chicago when I was there last month at the Art Institute of sketchbooks.
In the library they had cases full of sketchbooks from everybody from David Hockney to Aga.
And it's amazing because when you see those intimate things where people are doing in notebook, you see the clumsiness, you see all of the faults that all artists make, and they're making their draftsmanship when they're not on it.
It's like a writer writing out sentence fragments.
Precisely.
Well, the Picasso sketchbooks are just out.
I just got a copy of it the other day.
I haven't had a chance to really absorb it, but it's apparently an extraordinary thing.
How do you explain, you are, I'm not going to say you're unique in publishing today, but really the stuff that you're doing, the audience is basically adult.
Right.
Oh, that's what we left there.
Jump.
No, you got that.
You got Jump.
I got Jump.
We got three from HBJ.
Okay.
And we're going to get to that because it's color and it's clearly for kids.
But before we get to that, explain to me.
if you can.
What's happened in publishing?
We got away from, maybe it was television or the movies or what, but we don't have the NCYF type stuff that used to be so popular.
I wish I knew the answer to the question.
I recently had lunch with Jane Ann Phillips, a writer who I had.
Because I wanted to do a book with her.
I wrote her a letter.
I wrote her a fan letter.
I said, hey, look, I really thank you.
This stuff is really wonderful and so forth.
I don't presume that you know my work, so I'm going to enclose a few things.
It's not too presumptuous and so forth.
What I'm suggesting is that we collaborate on something.
So she called me.
She said, what kind of collaboration do you have in mind?
I said, I thought, that is.
But I think if you're interested, if you're sufficiently interested after seeing the stuff that I sent you, maybe it's worth lunch.
Well, I hope she'd heard of you.
She hadn't.
Jesus.
Which is, that's all right.
There's no big deal there.
She said she had seen some things about Huckleberry Finn, but really wasn't that familiar with it.
Just fine.
So I went over to Brookline, we had lunch together, and we hit it all.
And there probably will be at some point a project, but I don't know what the project will be.
The thing that brought that to mind is, I asked her, I said, what is it?
Why is it that there are no longer liaisons in the
in the world like there was between Dickens and Crookshane, between Kimball and Twain, between Carol and Tenney.
And the answer apparently is twofold.
And I've also had the same discussion with Eudora Welty.
I've had similar discussions with other people as well, Jamie Yolen.
I'm just now getting into correspondence with Ellen Gilchrist and it's the same.
Well, apparently the answer lies somewhere in these two things.
One, most writers today paint the pictures themselves to the point where they don't want anybody like me fucking around with them.
You know, basically.
Do you really believe that?
I think that's what most of the writers really do believe.
That's what they probably say, but...
Well, I said, my response to that to Jane Ann was this.
I said, you know, yes.
Did she imply that?
She said that.
She didn't just imply it.
She made a statement.
How about Eudora, who's really from another generation?
Yeah, now she's an entirely different thing, because I'm doing the Robert Bridegroom with her, and that'll be out probably next fall.
And that's my big project.
Who's going to publish that?
Well, I'm going to publish it in a limited edition of about 100 copies, 150 copies, and then HBJ will bring it.
Yeah, and then I'll do it with… Will she sign them?
The hundred copies she probably will, yeah.
We'll file them all down there.
What would you sell those for?
They'll go probably for about a thousand, something like that.
Because they'll only be about a hundred on the market.
We have long since seen today that we'll ever do another edition of 350 books.
You know, because 350 books, you're talking about $40,000 worth of bindings, and I'm just not going to have $40,000 sitting up there in that barn, which is very ridiculous.
Anyway, go ahead.
This is a meeting that just happened three weeks ago in Jackson, and I'm talking with her.
You know, the book was based on the Grimm fairy tale, the Robert Brian Croom, but it was also then populated by or peopled by characters who were historical characters
in the Natchez Trace, and in Rodney's Landing, Mississippi, and all this, kind of the Hart Brothers and all that.
Well, I asked her, I said, now, because I usually do a lot of research on them.
I study.
When I say I've never read these books before, I come to them.
It doesn't mean I don't know them now.
And I know these books.
I really know the books once I get into them.
I read them probably, on average, I read them five times.
Well, about three times before I start working.
And then once I start working and I'm working on an image of Pat Finn, I'll read the whole bloody book up until the time of course he dies.
I'll read that over and over and over to make certain that there's no mention of some physical characteristic that I missed, you know, that he wears spectacles or that he's clean-shaven or that he has a beard or he's missing one ear, you know, or something like that's a mole on his cheek.
Something that might
It might escape you on a first reading and a second reading.
So I go back and do that sort of thing.
So parts of both I bloody well know by heart.
I quote them at length.
But at any rate.
Have you made any mistakes like that?
Not that I know of.
Have you given somebody a moment that you shouldn't have?
I'm sure I have.
I'm sure I have, but not that I know of.
Okay.
It's the beard that worries me that I'll miss.
Somewhere it says it.
You know, his long flowing beard, and I miss that making clean shaver.
That sort of makes my skin crawl to think about doing something like that.
But anyway, where was I?
So asking Eudora, I said, now how do you think, how much research do you think I should do on this?
And she said, none.
And I said, well, I was just wondering, you know, because you use historical character, and so she did a wonderful essay called
A Fairy Tale of the Natchez Trace, which she gave to the Mississippi Historical Society.
I hear that.
It's in the eye of the story.
It was also published separately, I think.
Yes, it was.
So anyway, she said, no.
I said, well, okay.
But I said, I probably will anyway, because it's just my way of working.
Fine.
Mr. Dorff, how much input do you want to have in this?
Do you want to see galleys?
Do you want to correct galleys again?"
She said, no.
You're going to design the book as well?
I've already done that.
That's all done.
Type is being set now.
Oh, so you're moving.
Yeah.
Well, actually, type's not being set.
Type is specced and ready to be set.
As soon as we have contract negotiations done, that'll probably take another six weeks.
Now, who picked this?
Is this something that you decided to do?
Well, I met her in… She had a number of interesting works.
Why this particular one?
She and I came to the conclusion at her house drinking bourbon whiskey.
May 20, God, I thought I'd never forget that day.
I think it was May 21st, May 22nd or something.
Just at the, you know, just at the eyes of spring or the first of the summer, whatever.
Was this down in New Orleans?
It was in Jackson, in her home.
Oh, so you went over there from the ABA.
I went to Jackson prior to the ABA and then drove down with these friends.
I miss seeing you at the ABA.
Yeah, I always do ABA.
It's such a great time anyway.
The last two years of San Francisco to the Welland Room.
You can put together so much business at ABA.
I mean, it's absolutely amazing.
So anyway, I went to her house, and it was an invitation that had been worked by my friend John Evans, and we went over to her house, and he introduced us, and because we had met
Several years, God, this is such a long and bold story.
I'll try to make it very simple and fast.
We had met, I think, first in Dallas, maybe.
Then we had seen each other at John and Mel Evans from Jacksonville.
They're one of the most wonderful bookstores I've ever been in.
Then we met again in Washington.
Then we met again in San Francisco.
And I'd never read Eudor Wealthy until I read One Writer's Beginning.
And so when I met John at San Francisco at a cocktail party with a jazz orchestra and a half,
We were shooting and I said, you know, I just read a book by a neighbor of yours.
And he said, who's that?
And I said, you're doing well.
He said, oh, really, what book?
And I said, one writer's beginning.
She's a big fan of yours.
Of yours?
What?
Oh, yeah, she just thinks your work is wonderful.
And I said, oh, he said, oh, God, it would give me so much pleasure.
So much pleasure if I could put you two together.
So then when it turns out that ABA is going to be in New Orleans, he said, why don't you come down a few days early, spend some time with us, you know, with me and my family, and we'll fix you some good Southern food, you know, for that long, for part of my heritage that I really miss, you know, turn and bring the red jiggas, and I'll introduce you.
So that's what I did.
I went over and we sat in her living room and drank bourbon whiskey and got to talk about it.
Pop the record, but is she a pretty good, did she pop them down...
as well as the next night.
Yeah, she hangs right in there.
I mean, the four of us put away a right smart amount of that bottle that night.
I'll tell you, we made a major assault.
She's just spectacular.
What a woman, Jesus.
So she said to me that she would really like to do something together.
And I had just read a story that had been given to her called the Shoebirds that she used for HBJ a long time ago.
And she...
went nuts.
I hate that story.
I don't ever want to hear that story's name mentioned.
I just, you know, she's the only thing I've ever did for money, she said, and I've never, ever allowed that to be reprinted.
And I said, okay, well, let's change the subject.
She said, well, if you would, of all of my work that you know, what would you like to do?
And I said, well, if I had my, if I had my brothers, I'd do the Robert Bradley.
She clenched up her fist like this, and she said, oh, I was hoping you would say that.
And, uh,
So that's where it came from.
The next day I called John Boynton, who was my editor at Hartford, in the adult trade section.
Told him about the conversation.
He said, I'll do his research, found out he owns the property of what we do.
So they own the property, she wants to do it, I want to do it, so we're going to do it.
Didn't Hartford Price do that particular book?
I think it was first published by...
Doubleday or Random.
She's done a couple with Random.
There was a world title in there, which is now defunct.
I know, because I collect her.
Well, the rights were sold to HBJ.
Okay.
Because they've been her publisher for a number of years now.
John Peron is still her editor, and he was with HBJ for forever.
Is she writing anything?
Nobody knows, and nobody's willing to ask.
I just wrote her yesterday and asked her.
I mean, she's an elderly woman, and you could understand if she's done.
Well, the thing is, in this conversation, she said to me, before the Robert Bridegroom came up, I don't tell a lot, but this is all honest to God's truth.
Don't expect me to use 90% of this either, by the way.
Oh, no, no.
She said to me, she said, you know, I would be honored to write something for you.
She said that to me, and I sit there with my mouth open.
That's a real collectible item.
What?
And I said, well, no, I wouldn't, I couldn't, how could I possibly say, oh, would you?
But she did make the offer, and she made the offer a couple of times.
She made the offer again while I was down there.
She must really love your work.
Well, apparently.
Does she have everything?
You should have sent everything.
Everything that I know that she doesn't have, I send to her.
Absolutely.
Who knows?
I rode in the elevator with her at the Algonquin Hotel once.
It was just, she was in New York to get some medal, you know, coming in half hungover in the morning.
Miss Welty, you know, such a pleasure.
Congratulations, you're a great heroine of life.
She's so funny.
She was just telling me about, she received some medal in Washington.
It wasn't the Medal of Freedom or was it?
Christ, it might have been.
She was there with Aaron Copeland.
I think that's what it was.
Yeah, Reagan gives this, the Congressional Medal of Freedom or something like that, that they give to the artists.
And that would be in line, yeah.
She was really kind of amused with the whole thing.
She said, I arrived at the airport and she said, they meet me with a wheelchair.
And she said,
I don't need a wheelchair.
Isn't that something?
That's insulting, that really is.
It really is, yeah.
But to get, to just get back on track of that, one thing about illustrating for adults, and why people aren't, why we're not illustrating contemporary fiction.
That was where we were.
Yeah, exactly.
But what we're, the outline is, okay, we went over there and we talked about the artist, the writer,
sense of interference with his or her imagery.
I think it's a legitimate point of view.
My response to Jane Ann Phillips about that was, well, yes, that is true so long as you see illustration is serving only one function, and that is to parallel the text.
You can illustrate a book by doing something other than that.
There are a lot of, you know, when I did The Red Badge of Courage, Fleming is nowhere in there.
There's no specific illustration that penned that book.
parallels it but from a different point of view entirely uh from whose point of view well it takes it takes the book i take the book apart because essentially what happens is you have the young man who the the boy who is taught that war is something glorious you know the the drum and fight and all that kind of bullshit then you've got the the the politicians that that wage that make the wars and the generals that wage the war then you've got the foot soldiers
And he's got the dead soldiers.
So what I did was take images of soldiers and children playing in war and so forth, and went through all of the wars that America has been in since the Civil War, beginning with the Civil War, which is where that story set, coming all the way up to Vietnam, and taking it and putting those illustrations in those kinds of categories.
Did you try to make a statement at all?
That was, yeah, that was somewhat didactic.
And I had read someplace where you saw Frankenstein as a
As an opportunity to make a political statement.
Which went awry.
I found more in it after I got going than I thought I was.
I found a different direction.
I found more politics than I was expecting.
But not the politics that I was originally dealing with.
Alright, so that's one thing.
The other thing is that in today's marketplace, the specter of money, it looms so big.
That publisher gives out 10% royalties with an illustrator.
If I want to do a book, I want royalties.
I don't want to be paid to do something.
I want royalties.
If I go blind, that's it.
Curtains for me.
I'd like to have royalties coming in to support me, at least partially.
Anyway, just the economics.
I want 5% of the loyalties, so the writer's got to be willing to take 5% of the loyalties.
And so you get that problem.
The publishers can be pushed up to...
Maybe give me a 15% royalty where each other would be getting seven or I would be willing to take five and a writer ten or split it.
That's a contemporary stuff, but that's why you're doing all these dead writers, obviously.
That was one of my questions.
The thing is, I'm tired of doing dead writers.
I'm tired of dealing with dead writers and I'm tired of dealing with 19th century sensibilities.
Not that I'm tired of dealing with 19th century costume or crapping and that sort of thing, but the sensibilities of the 19th century
But you're fascinating and wonderful.
It's time to come into the 20th century.
I'd like to get into my own time.
So you're going to start with Eudora.
That's the small end of the wedge, or it might be the big end of the wedge.
Yeah, and you've approached Jane Ann.
And Alan Gilchrist and a few others.
Alan Gilchrist is interesting.
Yes, she is.
Real interesting.
But she doesn't write long fiction, though.
Yes, she does.
The Annunciation.
There's one novel.
Is that right?
Yeah.
Oh yeah, okay, sure.
I thought she's really a short story writer.
She is, but that's her one novel, an extraordinary novel.
And Nancy Willard, I'm just now reading Nancy Willard, I'm doing a book with her next year too.
All women so far.
You know, with the exception of Norman Maclean, the only people that I've read in the last year
that I think are really, really good writers and women.
Oh, fiction too.
Have you ever thought of doing, you know, everything you've mentioned so far as a fictional work as a possible tool?
The only living writer who's ever worked with a poet.
And I've worked with a lot of poets, but I really have a penchant for fiction.
Is that stack of books over there in the corner?
That's all for me to read.
That's my reading list now.
And most of that is by men.
You know, Barry Hanno.
Jim Harrison.
Yeah.
Wonderful.
Legends of the Fall, if you've ever read that.
This is all books that have been recommended to me, the people of English.
These are things that you should read.
Oh, the Sue Miller is super.
Have you read the book?
I just started it.
That's where I'm headed.
I want to deal with, I'd like to deal with my contemporaries.
Because you're even looking at Dutch Lenin, so really you're considering everything.
Mysteries, adventures, contemporary stuff.
So we're at the really, to go back to something you said earlier, you're maturing steadily.
You're at the crossroads.
You're about to really embark on an entire new area.
Is that a fair... That's fair.
That's exciting.
That's what I think.
I think everything I've done up to this point has been preparatory.
To doing contemporaries doing what I want to do.
To do the major work.
And I think the major work... If I can just convince a handful of people... What is the major work that we do?
The major work will be contemporary literature, okay?
Now go ahead, if I can convince a handful of people.
If I can convince a half a dozen more people, you know, and I think starting with Edole Wealthy is a good place to start.
It's not going to start much better.
See what can happen to your... How about William?
Read William Kennedy.
I had never read William Kennedy before.
He's one of the ones right up there on my list.
Yeah.
Norman McLean.
He's going to be in Boston in a couple weeks.
Really?
I did a children's day.
Let me just shut this up for a second.
Give me that quote again.
You saw somebody wearing a button on a lapel which said, so many books, so little time.
And that's it.
And really, I mean, how in the name of God, and I have to depend on people like yourself and John Evans and people say, geez, you know, and here's somebody you should read, because otherwise I can't, I read the New York Times there, you know, on Sundays, you know,
There was Peter Taylor's new book yesterday.
I said, thank God I've got to read that, but what am I going to do with all this?
I mean, which one am I going to do?
Have you read any of Dutch Leonard's stuff?
No.
You won't be able to put it.
You've got the latest one there, I think.
You've got a proof of the new one.
I read Glitz last year, when I remember that came out a year or two years ago, and then I went through a Leonard thing.
I had to read ten of his books.
Another one of my problems is I read very slowly.
So do I, and I read for a living.
Well, I don't know.
I'm reading faster and faster as time goes on, but I mean, I read it slightly above a level of mentally handicapped.
Oh, come on, don't say that.
What are you doing, thirty pages an hour, forty pages an hour?
Well, that's about what I do, and I read three, four books a week.
I will never take a speed reading course, either, because I think you'd lose so much.
See, I proofread my life.
See, that's a problem, because I'm a typesetter and I'm a printer, and I just read it.
Things like it really bother me.
I'm reading this Nancy Willard book now.
I picked up three typos last night.
There was one in the Aeneid, I think, wasn't there?
I wouldn't be surprised.
Very early on in the years, and it kind of ticked me off.
I remember them going back several years now, but there's a typo almost in them.
Even before it's like page one, it's one of the prefatory pages.
Oh, God, not Alex.
There's the word California's misspelled.
Yeah, things like that.
They drive you nuts.
But anyway.
So I guess that's part of it.
One of the things I have heard is you have chosen texts that seem to tread the middle water, works of interest and wonder to both children and adults.
You know, Huckleberry Finn, Alice.
Was this by design, or was it merely just the way it happened?
The first two books, Alice and Looking Glass,
Well, we did this first, but that's not my impression, so that's why I intend to omit it.
And that was a commission.
The other books came about as to how to make a, you know, what I want to do is to make a big, beautiful book.
What book do you want to make big and beautiful?
Well, that depends on what book you think you can sell.
Because you can't go out and spend a quarter of a million dollars on a project and
not hope to sell it.
So you have to do a little market research and so forth.
So in our talking to dealers and booksellers and so forth in the antiquarian market, a lot of the books that we've done are titles that came out of that research that seem to have a good market.
What others are you thinking about?
Right now?
Are you kind of really forging ahead?
I'm phasing all that out.
We'll probably do Jacqueline Hyde.
It'll be interesting.
I was supposed to get that done this year, because this is the 86th anniversary.
And I was going to mark that anniversary.
Nobody else seems to be doing anything.
It's news to me.
And I've already got an introduction by Joyce Carol Oates.
It's in the desk back there.
You know, everything is square.
It's both designed and types that are copied.
Everything's ready to go.
Using a new text, or a standard text, or an MLA kind of a text.
And we're not going after any kind of...
Like the Huckleberry Finn was a major text.
See, Huckleberry Finn was commissioned at the University of California.
Yeah, but that's a major text.
Right.
It almost would cause a first edition, I think.
Seven or eight years of restoration.
Yeah.
Yeah, it's a major, major textual work.
So it's to Alice that it's major textual work.
Frankenstein is simply the first printing, the 1818.
What else?
The Wizard of Oz is, again, the first American franchise, no big deal.
And so the same would be with that.
But you see, what I want to do is, I really, in terms of finishing that up, from Frankenstein to Huckleberry Finn, never mind.
From Frankenstein to Dr. Jekyll and Hyde, then I would like to follow that with Dracula, and then follow that with Picture Dorian Gray.
Those are the four books of the 19th century that I would still like to do, the three that I would still like to do.
And then just kind of kiss off that century leg there.
And then stop it.
Do the four big horror things, you know.
Because those are very appealing to me.
And Oates has already written the Frankenstein introduction.
She's a good, yeah.
That was a good introduction.
She would also do Dracula and the others.
We talked about that and she's already agreed to do them.
So I've got all that in place.
It's just a matter of my energy.
The thing is, I did so much of that so fast that I think I may have burned something.
Are there any pictures that you'd take back?
All of them.
Really?
All except maybe three.
But the point is, it's just like a writer, you can never be happy with the latest draft.
You'd always like... That's all it is.
It's the latest draft.
If I hadn't... And there comes a point where you have to say, Fini.
Done.
Let's get on to the next job.
I said someplace, some place that I wrote something, I said, you know, I never consider that I ever finish anything.
I just quit.
There's a point at which I have to stop.
Interesting.
I did an interview with William Kennedy.
I'll send you a copy of that interview, by the way.
It was in the same magazine a couple of years ago.
I'll send you all of them when this thing comes out.
But Viking had brought out his first novel, which was 69, with a new introduction.
And I said, boy, here they were bringing it out.
And it is his least successful novel.
It's his first.
And I said, were you even slightly tempted to go in there and retool it?
He said, no, he said, because that's completed work.
It represents a phase in my development and where I was at that time.
And sure, I see the weaknesses and I know the weaknesses, but I'm thinking about my next novel now.
That's done.
I love the line, that's completed work.
And that's exactly what you're saying right here.
You know, it's done.
Next case.
Let's get on to the next project.
It's all a matter of the rungs of the ladder that you're climbing up on your own material.
You were satisfied with it when you did it, and that has to be... And by and large, I'm satisfied with them today.
But there are certainly images that embarrass me.
And if I'm doing a public lecture, I never use.
Of all the books I've done, there's one...
image.
There's one image.
I made this point just the other night in a lecture.
Because I don't see illustration as being the art of the book.
Illustration is merely part, one part, of the art of the book.
Before I do the illustrations, I do the design.
I know what my margins are going to be.
I know what my typeface is going to be.
I know what the density of that texture, what we call, in typography, what's called color, and what the color of the page is going to be.
We got all that figured out.
long before I ever do an illustration.
Then I have the typeset.
I get galleys back, do all the editorial work, get all that stuff in place.
Then build my dummy.
Once I have the dummy built, when I start building the dummy, I simply fold up my sheets and start pasting it up.
Okay, okay, now I want to illustrate this point here.
Okay, so I'm going to illustrate, I put the illustration here.
Or I leave myself this much space and then go on.
I don't know what that's going to be, but I know it's going to be five lines
deep, and I know it's going to be the full width, or I know it's going to be a full page.
And I know that at that point I'm going to put in the scarecrow's brain.
Okay, that's a question.
So the design of the book almost dictates what the illustration is going to be.
No, it doesn't dictate what they're going to be, but it's going to dictate their scale.
How about the subject, though?
Well, that'll come from the text.
The text will tell me, okay, here I'm coming upon the scarecrow's brain.
Okay, so I've got to... So now I leave myself about this much space to do the scarecrow's brain.
And then I go on and do it up until I come to the next thing that I want to illustrate.
Then I leave myself space there.
And I think, well, Scarecrow's brains is not as important an image as, say, an image of Tim Woodman.
So Tim Woodman will be a full page.
This is only going to be a third of a page and that sort of thing.
Then I go back and I start making my drawings.
And then from the drawings I make the engravings.
So the illustration is, in a sense, very much the last thing that happens.
It has to fit into the mold.
It fits into the pen that I have proscribed for myself.
And you do your own wood engravings.
And I do all that, yeah.
And so in this lecture, the other day, I said to the audience that of all the work that I've done, all the hundreds of illustrations, there's one that I think can be extracted from the book and hung on a wall and exist as an object of art by itself with no reference to anything else.
And that's the image of the castle of the Wicked Witch of the West.
I did something in that print that I've never done before and haven't done since, in terms of technique and imagery.
It works, it's just a nice piece, bicep, doesn't need what it is.
But all the other things, you can't take them out of this.
When I see an exhibit of my work in a gallery, it really bothers me because I see these black and white images around, and I want to see them on a page with type because that's the way they were envisioned.
You're telling me something now for my layout, too, by the way.
Maybe I'll reproduce a couple of entire pages as opposed to just... Well, but it would be on a page, though, you see.
In a tabloid, in a newspaper, it'll be on a page.
And that's fine.
That's not discomforting at all.
But when they're up there, you know, that's a different matter.
I love the one you picked for your mantle, though.
I don't even know where that came from.
That came back from my show and got stuck up there.
I don't want to take up too much of your time.
Making the jump the jump.
Color.
Children.
Is this something that somebody approached you with?
Yeah, sure.
Somebody asked a question.
Would you be interested?
Sure, I'm interested in doing anything.
especially things I haven't done before.
And, well, we need color.
I said, no, big deal.
I majored in painting in college, and I'm not a stranger to color.
And I've been doing watercolors all my life.
But did you apply the same interpretive skills that you've been... Yeah, it's a different game.
You're playing, you use the Red Sox analogy, well, if I'm playing in that league with Huckleberry Finn,
in Frankenstein, now I want to play Little League.
It's the same game except that you're not playing with the same.
Except I understand it's twenty-five, thirty-five thousand first printing.
Isn't that sweet?
The kid market can be very subjective, can't it?
Boy, I'm telling you.
Now here's the interesting thing, because as this happens,
I'd never done children's books, never thought about doing children's books, and there's plenty of people say, what do you do, you know, so I meet casually, what do you do for a living?
I illustrate books.
Oh, children's books?
No, no, classics mostly, you know, because as soon as you say you illustrate books, most people jump with conclusions, especially doing children's books.
I never done one, never thought about it.
When I had my luncheon with Jan Phillips, went over to her house after lunch, met her little baby boy, and, uh,
I saw her collection of 19th Century 10 toys and stuff, and we got to talk about what a possible collaboration might be.
She said, well, you know, one thing that I've always wanted to do is write a children's book.
She had nothing of junk.
Had no idea that I had any of that.
I said, no shit.
I said, this is really funny because, and I told a story, when I was in Jackson two weeks ago, sitting out having a
a couple of drinks with Mel, who was John's wife, and Mel was saying, you know, Ellen Gilchrist was over the other night, because her, Ellen's grandson and their son play together, playmates, they live right near each other.
She was over here the other night and she was talking about, you know, she was sorry that she wasn't going to be here when you were here and all that stuff.
And she said, she told me to tell you that if you were ever interested in doing a children's book, she'd like to write one.
is starting this whole business with the children's book now.
William Kennedy just did one.
Yeah, exactly.
You tell me that, and James Dickey, of course, has done two or three.
William Faulkner did one going back, but it's an attraction to do that.
Sure.
Absolutely.
It's a whole little level of communication.
You don't want to pander, and you don't want to step down, but you still want to connect.
You still want to connect with your thought, intellectual thought and visual thought.
All it amounts to is that I apply a little more humor, I think, more than anything else.
It's just a little bit more of the lack evasable.
The thing is that if I were to take any of the illustrations from Jones and do them as wood engraved,
And it was precisely the same image.
It changed the medium.
Entirely.
It would change the message.
Well, they're a lot softer, I think.
Exactly.
And as soon as they become black and white, and wood engravings being so insistently black and white, people would immediately perceive them as being dark, just like they do my Alice illustration.
Now, one of the areas I'm collecting, I've determined that there are at least 22 books that Winslow Homer.
Mm-hmm.
I've got about half a dozen of them so far.
Oh, really?
Well, the book people, I'll shut this up.
It's just the one thing that you have to be aware of, is that a lot of what was illustrated with wood engraving was not printed from the blocks, but printed from electrotype.
They do the same thing with type.
They send the type by hand, make a proof of it, and then make an electrotype.
That's what they do at newspapers now.
I think it's all coal-type.
Right, exactly.
Except if they would do it, you would end up with a relief plate, so that you're printing it, you know, and pressing it into the paper, not making a lithographic surface.
Are you a throwback?
That's a question.
What?
A throwback.
Am I?
Yeah, to another era, another... God knows.
I don't know.
Maybe.
Maybe I'm an anachronism.
But then again, maybe I'm the avant-garde.
Except that people certainly are responding to it.
Whether or not illustration with books or contemporary books is something that's not being done, the fact is when you do it, when you do it, people are responding to it, and they want it.
I really don't know.
I don't know how to answer the question.
It's not anything that I ever really concern myself with, whether I'm in the front or the rear or in the ranks.
I do what I do because I love to do it and feel good in doing it and think that at this point I'm just now getting to the point where I have enough arrogance to think that I do something well, well enough to keep doing it.
Arrogance is a big part of making life anyway.
It has to be pretty arrogant.
It has to be.
You have to realize that your stuff is good.
Because if you don't, who else is... Absolutely.
I mean, if you don't think it's good... When I was teaching in school, people would ask me, even now, when I'm out on the lecture circuit, people would say, you know, I have a kid who's talented.
What do you think I should... How do you think I should encourage this?
I said, well, let me ask you quite a couple of questions.
One, does your kid have unlimited energy?
The answer is no.
I'm going to tell your kid don't do it.
But he's got a lot of talent.
It doesn't matter.
He doesn't have unlimited energy.
He doesn't have the absolute determination and drive to do it.
And if not satisfied doing anything else, tell him or her not to do it.
But he's got a lot of talent.
It doesn't matter.
Talent's a little bit of weight, a lot of the necessary work.
Everybody gets talent.
It takes energy.
It takes drive.
It takes determination.
It takes a little bit of arrogance.
Yeah, well, you see, your quote is almost a little different from the Hemingway one.
They asked him, what does it take to be a great writer?
He said, the first thing is, there's no substitute for hard work.
He said, work, work, work.
You know, the second, unfortunately, is talent.
Yeah.
Well, he also said the most important thing with a young writer, I guess it's the most important thing with a young writer,
can have is a built-in shockproof ship.
That's good.
Okay, I'm going to wrap it up.
I think I've got plenty of stuff.
Just one other thing about, is there something about wood engraving that is particularly appealing or attractive, say, to an adult audience?
I mean, now you did color for the kids.
Why didn't you do wood engravings for them?
Because the publisher asked me what he wanted.
So if you'd had your druthers, would you have done wood engravings?
No, not particularly, because...
I use wood engraving to do limited edition books, and we can print them on my press along with a type.
So it's a functional thing, yeah.
It's a functional medium for doing limited edition books.
If I'm doing, like when we do the Robert Bryan group, I'll present HVJ with three packages when I finish this.
I'll give them a book illustrated with original wood engraving, black and white with a little color and a typography project.
That's one option.
Second option, I'll take one set of the plays.
and meticulously hand-color them.
Then that'll be a second option.
The third option will be I'll take each one of those illustrations and do it as a watercolor.
So at HBJ, they will have a choice in how they want to go with it.
And they can do it as a facsimile of my edition, which would be just black and white.
Or they can do it black and white with a color, you know.
Let's see, what's the deal that you usually write in a year, at least a year, before they can come out to trade?
I can do a book.
You've done one simultaneous I know.
I can probably get a book out, designed and illustrated, if I have read it at least a year ahead.
I can do it in about three or four months.
If I have control over design,
and no interference from the publishers.
And you pick good publishers.
UCAL is unique.
They're wonderful.
And HBJ is nice.
And Houghton's a nice company.
Now that little book is kind of an odd one.
Yeah, it is an odd duck.
The check clears the check clears.
The check clears.
We were sitting up there on that counter there and the editors were here and we were
You know, what do you want?
Well, we've got— Did Houghton come to you for that one?
Yeah, so— But they're a nice house.
Yeah, they do exactly what they want.
And I said, well, it depends on three things.
One is timing.
And there they really screwed me up.
They said, well, we need it by March.
And I said, fine, so that fits right in the mind.
I can do it.
Well, then things got screwed up.
And they were nine or ten months delivering anything in some manuscript.
And I told them, they deliver parts of it.
I don't work together.
You've got to give me the whole manuscript.
I've got to have the whole thing before I can start.
And my other thing was timing, money, and artistic control.
As long as I have control, the price goes down.
When I have to go through committees, and the price goes up, and it goes up in proportion to the number of people that sit on that committee.
Now, if I had to assign people proving something, my price is always kind of outrageous.
That's about what you'd be.
It's a nuisance.
But that's why, usually in my conversation with people now, I say, look, you've come to me because you've seen my work.
That's what you want.
You've seen this, and that's the style, that's the look that you want.
Let's go away and leave me alone.
And I'll give you something that you'll be proud of and you'll be happy with, but don't tell me how to do my work.
And it works for everybody except Madison Avenue.
I love it.
Now go away and leave me alone.
I get really a lot of stuff, so I'm going to shut this off.
You have included yourself, you say, in every book?
Yeah, there's a self-portrait in every book since Moby Dick.
And why is that?
Is this ego again, or is this your signature?
I did it in Moby Dick, and...
I don't know, it appealed to me.
I like the idea of doing it and have just done it ever since.
Yeah, it's more of a signature than anything.
It's the presence, you know, it's like Alfred Hitchcock walking through water.
And you've got people, other people that you've known, other people that you... People I like, there are little in-jokes that you do.
That doesn't detract from the work in any way.
It's not even important.
In Wizard of Oz, for instance, you know, it's just four political figures, you know, from Reagan and Lee Iacocca and Gene Kirkpatrick and Jerry Falwell and all that whole thing.
It neither does anything for the tech centers to do anything yet, but it's just my sense of play.
I think it was Gertrude who said, I entertain myself with myself.
That's good.
And I do that.
That's entertainment for me.